I want to show you something. It's one
of those cases where a picture says a
thousand words.
This is the global shipping density. It
shows the total number of AIS positions
reported by all vessels between 2015 and
2021.
The data includes commercial ships,
fishing ships, passenger ships, leisure
ships,
and also hydrocarbon tankers. What
you're seeing is essentially the nerve
system of global [music] trade. This is
what keeps the world running.
Welcome once again to Caspian Report.
I'm your host Shirvan.
And I'm wrapped about today's episode.
By the way, I'm making the video in this
format because it's more affordable,
faster, and basically easier to convey
information.
Now, let's zoom close into the
Caribbean. You can instantly appreciate
Cuba's strategic position. It pretty
much sits at the mouth of the Gulf of
Mexico.
Every vessel entering or leaving the
Gulf must pass through a handful of
maritime corridors that run close to
Cuba.
These routes [music] connect the Gulf
Coast to the Atlantic and by extension
to the global economy.
Now, the Gulf Coast, particularly Texas,
is home to some of America's largest oil
refineries, LNG [music] export
terminals, petrochemical facilities,
naval bases, commercial [music] ports.
Let me just enable LNG terminals
so that you can get a better
understanding. So,
this right here shows America's LNG
terminals.
>> [music]
>> Purple represents export terminals, and
pink represents import terminals.
Take note
of this massive cluster of assets right
here by the coast.
Let me
>> [music]
>> enable refineries now. Let's turn off
the previous layer for a cleaner look.
So, these are America's refineries or
the world for that matter. The source
covers the entire globe.
But, the larger the bubble, the larger
the output.
Again, Texas and New Orleans stand out.
By the way, the app I'm using is called
Delta Suite. It's our own intelligence
hub. It has dozens of features like what
you're seeing, and it's essentially the
platform where we do our research. For
more information, visit deltasuite.com.
Anyway, if we enable all rivers, you get
a glimpse of the Mississippi system.
This is the world's most extensive,
commercially navigable river system.
It drastically reduces the movement
costs of bulky cargo when compared to
overland trade.
And the whole river system is nearly
maintenance-free, and it pretty much
covers all of the United States.
Even when we turn off rivers, just by
measuring shipping density, you can
still see the layout of the Mississippi.
>> [music]
>> This town, for instance, almost smack in
the middle of North America, is
connected by river,
navigable commercial river, to the open
oceans.
Without this one-of-a-kind river system,
America would simply not be the same
country.
It would probably not be the economic
and industrial powerhouse it is. [music]
Let me quickly enable the night time
map. This one was made by NASA. It's
probably my favorite base map.
The neat thing about this one
is that it doubles as a way of measuring
demographic [music] density.
Roughly 70% of the world's population
lives within a day's travel of the
coast, but if you include rivers,
that number becomes much higher.
And that's basically what you're seeing
here.
All these cities, all this economic and
cultural life
would look very different without the
Mississippi. Let me turn on the rivers
again.
Yeah, this looks good.
So, all this ties together to create a
bigger picture.
>> [music]
>> And it's precisely why I'm using Delta
Sweep to go over this.
Anyway, the point is that a large share
of US energy exports and [music]
imports, and even commercial activity,
moves through the Mississippi. It then
seeps into the Gulf of Mexico,
and then passes through the Caribbean.
This is what fuels [music]
American industry and consumption.
Cuba, however, is the bottleneck.
Now, suppose for a minute,
in 50 years from now, in a timeline that
is wildly different from ours,
some hostile power sponsors Cuba and
equips it with tactical weapons, enough
to disrupt the trade
going through any of the major
maritime [music] passages.
The distance from Cuba to Florida
is
only about 250 km, [music]
measured from coast to coast.
But, if you were to measure it to Miami,
for instance, its distance sits at
roughly 440 km.
>> [music]
>> Meanwhile, it's only about
300 km to Mexico's coast.
However, or whichever way you measure
it, these distances
can be easily covered by aerial drones.
Now, recently Axios reported that Cuba
had acquired over 300 military drones,
according to an anonymous US official,
and that these drones [music]
would be deployed against the US
military base at Guantanamo Bay and Key
West in Florida.
I bookmarked this feed specifically for
this video. And more recently, according
to the Wall Street Journal, US
intelligence has identified Chinese and
Russian intelligence activities [music]
in Cuba.
Most likely, they're running signals
intelligence sites on the island, which
in simple terms means they're listening,
intercepting, and analyzing electronic
communications and emissions,
and it could all be related to the US
naval vessels entering or leaving the
Gulf of Mexico, or radar emissions from
military exercises, or maybe even
communications from facilities like Cape
Canaveral Space Force Station.
Of course, an attack on US territory or
property would be suicide for Cuba.
And no serious analyst [music]
believes the island
poses a threat to the United States
today.
Any sizable hostile military build-up on
Cuba would be detected long before it
became operational,
but
geography has a way of outlasting
politics.
So, it's totally unfeasible,
but still Cuba
may very well be the only geographic
vulnerability of the United [music]
States.
Even decades from now, a rival power
wants to give the US a bloody nose,
Cuba would be the way to do it.
Not because it could defeat the United
States,
but because it sits next to some of the
most important maritime routes in the
[music] Western Hemisphere. The island
functions like an unsinkable aircraft
carrier positioned at the entrance to
the Gulf of Mexico.
In friendly hands, Cuba is largely
irrelevant.
But in hostile hands,
it becomes impossible to ignore. And
this is precisely what makes it so
unique.
Unlike most potential challenges to the
United States, this one [music] is
geographic rather than political.
Thing is governments change. They rise
and fall.
Even alliances like NATO shift with
trends.
Geography, however, remains.
And
it's precisely with this in mind that
Trump is now stepping up pressure on
Cuba.
He simply [music] can't allow the
Western Hemisphere
to become a playground in any meaningful
way for geopolitical rivals, namely
China and Russia. Anyway,
let's get back to the map.
Let's clear everything and
return to the default base map. Now,
let's enable ship tracker.
Okay, this is where it gets spicy. There
are currently three carriers in the
region.
We got the Nimitz here, but we also have
two amphibious ready groups.
The Iwo Jima is currently in Puerto Rico
and the Kearsarge is in New Orleans.
None of these carriers were there a week
ago.
Let me just show you.
Here are the positions from 7 days
[music] ago.
There.
>> [gasps]
>> So, all three carriers [music] and their
escorting ships are coalescing into the
Caribbean.
This is highly unusual. In fact,
it is now the largest naval build-up in
the world outside the Middle East.
You know what? Let's quickly compare the
two.
Let's move to the Arabian Sea.
Zoom in a bit. So, here is the armada
that carried the war with Iran.
You've got two carrier strike groups
and one amphibious [music]
ready group and about a dozen
independently operating ships.
By the way, this app, Delta Sweep, is
basically how we keep track of things.
We are rolling it out to the public. It
only costs $6 a month,
>> [music]
>> but using the app, we've been able to
make some pretty crazy predictions in
the past. Anyway, let's go back to the
Caribbean.
So, the armada here is not nearly as
large as it is in the Arabian Sea, but
then again, Cuba is not nearly as armed
as Iran.
But, what is important
>> [music]
>> is distance and geography.
Cuba's proximity to the American
homeland means that technically the US
can bring about astonishing violence on
the island
with little to no warning or [music]
prep work.
There are enough bases in Florida alone
>> [music]
>> to make quick work of Cuba's
conventional forces.
So,
why then the need to move aircraft
carriers into the region?
Well,
nothing is quite as intimidating as an
armada parked
right outside your house.
Trump has floated the idea of invading
Cuba several times now, but with the US
Navy moving about in the region,
>> [music]
>> it conveys the message that the US can
act instantly without warning at all.
Aircraft carriers, they get the message
across. They're the pinnacle of American
power projection.
The Nimitz and Iwo Jima and Kearsarge
are there to scare and coerce the Cubans
[music] into submission.
But, for this to work, the threat has to
be tangible,
visible, and most of all, ready and able
to be used in a military operation if
needed. Hence, the three carriers in the
Caribbean.
So,
right now, the Pentagon has all the
assets in place to launch a military
attack on Cuba. The capacity is there.
It's all in place.
All that is needed is the political
decision, the final go-ahead from
[music] Trump.
Now, suppose that happens, a military
operation [music] can take many
different forms.
The US can capture the Cuban leadership,
much like they did [music] with
Venezuela's,
but they can also launch
precision strikes into Cuba.
The USS Gridley, for instance,
this is a missile-guided destroyer. That
means it can launch precision missiles
at targets on shore.
Even more interestingly, the USS
Kearsarge here recently docked at New
Orleans.
It's an amphibious ship. It carries
about 2,500 Marines. [music] So, if
things go sideways, there's always the
option of actually invading Cuba, like
boots on the ground.
Let me show you something.
So, this is the bathymetry of the ocean
floor. These contours show the depth.
For an amphibious assault, [music] you
want shallow waters with gentle slopes,
but not too shallow. If it's too
shallow, ships or landing craft could
get stuck further offshore, but if it's
too steep, the landing craft may not be
able to beach at all, or vehicles would
have to move further, or some bottleneck
with troops could develop.
Amphibious operations are really some of
the most complex military operations out
there. The list of countries capable of
doing it competently
is [music] surprisingly short.
There are like 10 countries in the world
that can actually [music] do it.
But anyway,
the sweet spot for a beach landing is
between 10 and 20 m of [music] depth
offshore. So, in Cuba's case,
that's here
and here.
I'm skipping these.
These are reefs [music] and broken
archipelagos. You don't want to send
them Marines there.
But you can send them here and here.
More reefs here, that's a big no.
Let's now cross-reference with the
shipping density.
Clearly, this needs more in-depth study.
Normally, you would need to do an even
closer resolution study, but for a
preliminary outlook,
>> [music]
>> this looks about right.
All these marked areas are places fit
for amphibious assault.
Now, looking at things from a
demographic angle, let's enable the
night base map for this.
You can really see the population
centers of Cuba now, and which places
need to be prioritized.
So, you could land the Marines at full
strength here,
and by securing this city or its
immediate surroundings,
you would cut the island in two.
Meanwhile, you could parachute in
airborne units [music] near Havana.
So, yeah.
The Pentagon isn't exactly short on
options. But, the main reason why I'm
bringing up this amphibious invasion
is because of Cuba's internal politics.
Obviously, when it comes to war, the
United States would much rather prefer
to keep it violent, but short, just like
in Venezuela.
The problem is that Cuba is more
ideologically entrenched. There is no
replacement
who would easily cave into Washington's
demands, simply because there is no
strong [music] civil society and
opposition movement in Cuba.
That means
if an exfiltration mission fails to
deliver results,
large-scale military operation would
then follow suit.
Now, this doesn't mean that war and
invasion will happen. It just means the
option, the capacity
for such an operation is in place.
Whether it will actually happen or not
is a political decision.
It all depends on Trump.
Now, interestingly, the USS Nimitz
arrived in the Caribbean on the same day
that the Justice Department announced
murder charges
against Cuba's 94-year-old former
president Raul Castro.
Have a look at [music] this feed.
The legal indictment and naval build-up
are eerily similar to what happened in
Venezuela,
which eventually resulted in a raid
that captured Maduro. After Maduro's
capture, he was taken to the US to face
charges [music]
connected to a narco-terrorism
conspiracy. So,
if diplomatic negotiations fail, the US
could use fighter jets based in Florida
and Puerto Rico
to take out Cuba's air defenses,
>> [music]
>> which would then allow for wider air
operations from the carriers nearby.
Raul Castro and Diaz-Canel [music]
would likely be among the top
priorities.
Either way, with the legal indictments
in place, it seems Trump is creating a
pretext
for a US law enforcement operation
targeting Cuba.
It would, of course, be a military
operation in every sense,
but it would legally be framed as a law
enforcement [music] operation.
Now, I'm also skeptical of Axios and The
Wall Street Journal. The timing and
framing of both papers
seems [music] like manufactured consent,
and it tells me the US is deliberately
leaking information to build a political
case,
>> [music]
>> a political narrative for military
action by posing Cuba as an imminent
threat to US national security.
>> [music]
>> Above all, the setup of everything, by
which I mean the carriers, the legal
indictment, the media leaks,
it all shows that there is a real
military and political case building for
conflict with Cuba.
That option, conflict with Cuba,
>> [music]
>> is real.
Not many people are realizing that.
Hopefully, none of this happens.
But if it does,
having some understanding of the
situation is better than going in
blindly.
The only problem that I can see is that
many of the big warships are now
approaching 10 months at sea,
which is far beyond the usual six to
seven months.
The Pentagon must avoid overextending
[music] crews and naval forces
because there is already an ongoing
operation in the Arabian Sea.
So, perhaps America's only restraint is
timing. [music]
Doing back-to-back long deployments adds
over time.
When you keep a carrier well over 10
months at sea, the refitting and repair
time for those ships adds up once they
come home.
Look at this.
At Norfolk alone, there are four
carriers and
two amphibious carriers
undergoing maintenance. Meanwhile,
here in San Diego, there are
1 2 3 4 carriers docked and one more in
Seattle, the USS [music]
Ronald Reagan.
So, the longer ships are at sea, the
longer the maintenance takes and [music]
that leaves you with fewer options in
the future.
Now, before we wrap up, a quick note
about Delta Sweep. Everything you saw in
this episode,
the shipping density, base maps, ship
tracking, intelligence feeds,
infrastructure layers, the marine depth
contours, [music]
aircraft movement and historical
timelines, all of it, more, way more,
[music]
is available inside the platform.
We originally built Delta Sweep [music]
for our own research purposes,
primarily because we were tired of
jumping
>> [music]
>> between tools and programs,
but over time, it became the backbone of
how we track geopolitical developments
and spot [music] trends before they
become the headlines. Some of you may
even recognize the base maps and the
features such as shipping density from
our videos way back ago
or
even this base map with the vibrant
colors. It's It's one of my favorites
and we've included it in the app as
well, so you know it's real.
Now, if you enjoy this kind of analysis
and you want to explore the data for
yourself, consider giving
Delta Sweep a try.
It's just $6 a month.
>> [music]
>> Every subscription helps us improve the
platform,
add new data sets,
and continue building tools [music]
for people who want a better
understanding of world events.
The link for it is in the description.
We'd love to have you on board.
Anyway, thank you for watching until the
end.
And salaam.